Conditional parameters documentation (#4876)
dotnet/templating: docs/Conditions.md

### Generated Conditions
Unlike C++ preprocessor conditions, template engine allows ability for using conditional expressions that are based on results of other expressions. Specifically [Evaluate](Available-Symbols-Generators.md#evaluate) and [Computed](Reference-for-template.json.md#computed-symbol) symbols can be leveraged for this purpose.

### Example 

> Simplified extraction from [C# Console Application template](https://github.com/dotnet/templating/tree/main/template_feed/Microsoft.DotNet.Common.ProjectTemplates.7.0/content/ConsoleApplication-CSharp):

Reviewer: nit: this link is not very reliable, after .NET 7 release cuts off it will be broken.

> (other related sample in [GeneratorTest.json](https://github.com/dotnet/templating/blob/main/test/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Orchestrator.RunnableProjects.UnitTests/SchemaTests/GeneratorTest.json#L82-L84)):

Reviewer 2: This is where I wish there was a way to signal that the linked text should be embedded :)

#else
// This renders for desktop platforms
#endif
```

## Conditional Parameters

[Parameter symbols in template](Reference-for-template.json.md#parameter-symbol) can be specified together with optional conditions:
* [`Is Enabled Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isEnabledCondition) - overwritting presence of input parameter. If condition is specified and evaluates to false, passed parameter value (if any) is ignored and processing works as if the symbol would not exist. This includes application of [default values](Reference-for-template.json.md#default), [verification of mandatory parameters](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired), [conditional processing of sources](Conditional-processing-and-comment-syntax.md) and [replacements](Reference-for-template.json.md#replaces).
* [`Is Required Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequiredCondition) - dictates if parameter is mandatory or optional. After evaluation the behavior is identical as for the [`isRequired`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired) config.

### Evaluation

> **Input** - currently only other parameter symbols from the template configuration are supported within the parameter conditions. Any other variables are not replaced.

Author: We cannot easily disallow variables that are not known - they are simply left as is.
I reworded the description to make it more clear

**Evaluation order** - Dependencies between parameters are detected and evaluation is peformed in order that guarantees that all dependencies are evaluated prior their dependant (see [Topological Sorting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sorting) for details).

>  In presence of cyclic dependency the evaluation proceeds only if current input values of parameters do not lead to undeterministic result (and the cycle is indicated in warning log message). Otherwise an error is reported, indicating the cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In case of cyclic dependency the evaluation proceeds only if current input values of parameters do not lead to indeterministic result (and the cycle is indicated in warning log message). Otherwise an error is reported, indicating the cycle.
```

 Example `template.json` with cyclic dependency:
```json
  "symbols": {
    "A": {
      "type": "parameter",
      "datatype": "bool",
      "isEnabledCondition": "B != false",
    },
    "B": {
      "type": "parameter",
      "datatype": "bool",
      "isEnabledCondition": "A != true",
    }
}
```

Following input parameter values can (and will) be evaluated deterministically: `--A false --B true`

Following input parameter values cannot be evaluated deterministically (and will lead to error): `--A true --B false`

**Applying of host and default values** - All host and default values are applied before the conditions evaluation. After the evaluation defaults are reapplied to parameters that were evaluated as optional and that do not have host supplied values. After this an evaluation of presence of mandatory values takes place.

> ### Performing evaluation externally

Author: @phenning Phill - once onboarding onto conditional parameters feature - this will be a way how to skip the template engine internal evaluation and supply the results from VS

> It is possible to supply evaluation results of parameters conditions when instantiating template via Edge API [`TemplateCreator.InstantiateAsync`](https://github.com/JanKrivanek/templating/blob/conditional-params-v1/src/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Edge/Template/TemplateCreator.cs#L84). Example use case is instantiation from Visual Studio host, that will leverage condition evaluator integrated within the New Project Dialog. 

Author: This waits for the https://github.com/dotnet/templating/pull/4872 to be merged.
I'll make sure to update those links afterwards

This can be achieved by passing the structured `InputParametersSet` argument and setting the [`SkipParametersConditionsEvaluation`](https://github.com/JanKrivanek/templating/blob/conditional-params-v1/src/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Edge/Template/InputParametersSet.cs#L41) property to `true`. The actual evaluation results are passed via individual [`InputParameter`s constructors](https://github.com/JanKrivanek/templating/blob/conditional-params-v1/src/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Edge/Template/InputParameter.cs#L30). 

> It is currently not possible to provide just partial external evaluation - meaning that the template engine evaluates either all the parameter conditions or none. If the [`SkipParametersConditionsEvaluation`](https://github.com/JanKrivanek/templating/blob/conditional-params-v1/src/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Edge/Template/InputParametersSet.cs#L41) property is set to `true`, results of all parameter conditions are expected to be passed within the `InputParametersSet` argument. If it is set to `false` - none explicit results within `InputParametersSet` argument.

Author: This is not exposed to CLI, it's an extension in `TemplateCreator` API for alternative hosts that need to evaluate conditions externally (e.g. VS)

> It is currently not possible to provide just partial external evaluation - meaning that the template engine evaluates either all the parameter conditions or none. If the [`SkipParametersConditionsEvaluation`](https://github.com/JanKrivanek/templating/blob/conditional-params-v1/src/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Edge/Template/InputParametersSet.cs#L41) property is set to `true`, results of all parameter conditions are expected to be passed within the `InputParametersSet` argument. If it is set to `false` - none explicit results within `InputParametersSet` argument.

Reviewer: How tab completion will be implemented then? We don't need to show the parameters which are not enabled, unless other parameters entered by users are set.

> It is currently not possible to provide just partial external evaluation - meaning that the template engine evaluates either all the parameter conditions or none. If the [`SkipParametersConditionsEvaluation`](https://github.com/JanKrivanek/templating/blob/conditional-params-v1/src/Microsoft.TemplateEngine.Edge/Template/InputParametersSet.cs#L41) property is set to `true`, results of all parameter conditions are expected to be passed within the `InputParametersSet` argument. If it is set to `false` - none explicit results within `InputParametersSet` argument.

Author: Discussed offline.
Tab completion support will be part of separate PR.

#else
// This renders for desktop platforms
#endif
```

## Conditional Parameters

[Parameter symbols in template](Reference-for-template.json.md#parameter-symbol) can be specified together with optional conditions:

> * [`IsEnabled Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isEnabled) - overwritting presence of input parameter. If condition is specified and evaluates to false (or a `false` constant is passed), passed parameter value (if any) is ignored and processing works as if the parameter value was not passed. This includes application of [default values](Reference-for-template.json.md#default), [verification of mandatory parameters](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired), [conditional processing of sources](Conditional-processing-and-comment-syntax.md) and [replacements](Reference-for-template.json.md#replaces).

Reviewer: Is it still the case in the latest version?

Author: It was adjusted for the latest version, but not precisely - fixing.

> * [`IsEnabled Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isEnabled) - overwritting presence of input parameter. If condition is specified and evaluates to false (or a `false` constant is passed), passed parameter value (if any) is ignored and processing works as if the parameter value was not passed. This includes application of [default values](Reference-for-template.json.md#default), [verification of mandatory parameters](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired), [conditional processing of sources](Conditional-processing-and-comment-syntax.md) and [replacements](Reference-for-template.json.md#replaces).

Reviewer 2: > overwritting presence of input parameter

I'm not sure what you mean to say with this sentence. I might suggest something like:

> Used to determine when (or if) this symbol should be used. If this condition is specified and evaluates to `false`, then this parameter is treated as if it does not exist. This applies to the use of [default values](Reference-for-template.json.md#default), [verification of required parameters](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired), [conditional processing of sources](Conditional-processing-and-comment-syntax.md) and [replacements](Reference-for-template.json.md#replaces)

> * [`IsRequired Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired) - dictates if parameter is mandatory or optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [`IsRequired Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired) - defines if parameter is mandatory or optional.
```

> * [`IsRequired Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired) - dictates if parameter is mandatory or optional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [`IsRequired Condition`](Reference-for-template.json.md#isRequired) - dictates if parameter is required or optional.
```

### Evaluation

**Input** - currently only other parameter symbols from the template configuration are supported within the parameter conditions. Any other variables are not bound and replaced (they are considered part of literal string).

**Evaluation order** - Dependencies between parameters are detected and evaluation is peformed in order that guarantees that all dependencies are evaluated prior their dependant (see [Topological Sorting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sorting) for details).

 In case of cyclic dependency the evaluation proceeds only if current input values of parameters do not lead to indeterministic result (and the cycle is indicated in warning log message). Otherwise an error is reported, indicating the cycle.

 Example `template.json` with cyclic dependency:
```json
  "symbols": {
    "A": {
      "type": "parameter",
      "datatype": "bool",
      "isEnabled": "B != false",
    },
    "B": {
      "type": "parameter",
      "datatype": "bool",
      "isEnabled": "A != true",
    }
}
```

Following input parameter values can (and will) be evaluated deterministically: `--A false --B true`

> Following input parameter values cannot be evaluated deterministically (and will lead to error): `--A true --B false`

Reviewer: Not sure if I am following this example:
- `--A false --B true` - leads to A enabled (true != false), B enabled (false != true)
- `--A true --B false` - leads to A disabled (false != false), B disabled (true != true)

Is it somehow related to the case when A and B are not set?

Author: Let me add the default values as well - that should make the example less confusing

Reviewer 2: When you do this, can you also show an example of the errors that a user would see in these cases?

> **Applying user, host and default values** - All user passed, host and default values are applied before the conditions evaluation. After the evaluation defaults are reapplied to parameters that were evaluated as optional and that do not have user/host supplied values. After this an evaluation of presence of mandatory values takes place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Applying user, host and default values** - All user-provided, host-provided and default values are applied before the conditions are evaluated. After the evaluation default values are reapplied to parameters that were evaluated as optional and that do not have user-/host-provided values. After this an evaluation of presence of required values takes place.
```

minor re-word of this, and I

> ### Performing evaluation externally

Reviewer: Just wondering if this paragraph should be added to api folder instead.

Author: Good idea - moving there
